# DevOps pipelines in GitLab CI/CD 🚀

Welcome to the DevOps pipelines guide for deploying your project using GitLab pipelines!
This README provides step-by-step instructions to set up your GitLab repository and initiate manual deployment pipelines.
Follow each step carefully to correctly configure your environment and secrets.

## Repository setup 🛠️

See [Get started with GitLab CI/CD](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/ci/).

### Step 1: Add the deployment environment variables

1.  Visit [GitLab](https://gitlab.com/), or your organization's GitLab instance, and log in with your credentials.
2.  Go to your repository at [{{ cookiecutter.github_organization }}/{{ cookiecutter.project_slug }}](https://gitlab.com/{{ cookiecutter.github_organization }}/{{ cookiecutter.project_slug }}).
3.  Click on `Settings` at the left menu and select `CI/CD`.
4.  Expand the `Variables`.
5.  Add all variables and their corresponding values, copying them from the `.env` file.
    This file is not commited into the repository, and that's why we need to add them here.

### Step 2: Add deployment's host SSH key as a known host

1.  Run `ssh-keyscan -t ed25519 DEPLOY_HOST` in a terminal, where you substitute `DEPLOY_HOST` with the address of the host, as in the `.env` file.
2.  Copy the prompted value, and add it as a `Variable` in the GitLab web interface, like in the previous step.
    Name the variable `SSH_KNOWN_HOSTS`.

See [Use SSH keys to communicate with GitLab](https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/user/ssh.html).

### Step 3: Add an SSH deployment key

1.  Create a new SSH key that will be used by GitLab CI/CD to connect to your host.
    You can create it in your terminal with the command `ssh-keygen -t ed25519`.
2.  Copy the public key to the `DEPLOY_HOST`'s user's `~/.ssh/authorized_keys` file.
    Check your `DEPLOY_HOST` and `DEPLOY_USER` in the `.env` file.
3.  Copy the private key as a `Variable` like in the previous step.
    Name the variable `DEPLOY_SSH_PRIVATE_KEY`.

*Note*: instead of creating a new key, you can use the one that this template creates for you when you run `make server-setup`. Check README.md file for details. Be aware that the key generated by this template will not be added to your git repository because it is explicitely excluded by the `.gitignore` file.

## Automatic deployment 🚀

The deployment is executed automatically on each commit to `main` branch.

You may want to adapt your development workflow to that, and use a `develop` branch to develop and create merge requests for deployments.

## Manual deployment 🚀

If you want to do manual deployments, you can enable the `when: manual` option of the `.gitlab-ci.yml` file.
By default it is commented.

## Deployment with an auxiliary docker image

The provided configuration tries to mimic the `Makefile` deployment flow.
It uses the same commands as you would use when deploying from your computer.

If you want, you can use an [auxiliary docker image](https://github.com/kitconcept/docker-stack-deploy/), which does the deployment for you instead of using the `Makefile`.
This Docker image is used if you configure the deployments in GitHub.

Check the commented section of the `.gitlab-ci.yml` file for an example.
